407 add workflow addon dev docs (#408)
ynput/ayon-documentation: website/docs/dev_addon_workflow.md

---
id: dev_addon_workflow
title: AYON Workflow Addon Developer Documentation
sidebar_label: Workflow
description: AYON Workflow Addon Developer Documentation
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

## Overview
This developer reference guide covers how to programmatically create, edit, execute, and extend custom workflows using the `ayon-workflow` Python API and Command-Line Interface (CLI).

## Quick Start: My First Workflow

Before deep-diving into execution frameworks, here is how to programmatically create an execution graph, define an entry parameter, and compute an in-memory results dictionary inside the AYON console:

```python
from ayon_workflow.workflow_editor import Workflow
from ayon_workflow.workflow_execution import execute_workflow
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_plugins

# Discover all available node definitions in the environment

> register_plugins()

Reviewer: Sorry I've just changed that in latest release.

```suggestion
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_all_plugins

# Discover all available node definitions in the environment
register_all_plugins()
```

```

## Glossary & Core Architecture

| Term | Domain | Definition |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Workflow** | Editing | An editable Python object describing an execution Graph and multiple optional DispatchGraphs. |
| **Graph** | Editing | An editable Python object describing a workflow execution composed of multiple Node objects. |
| **Node** | Editing | A Python object representing a unit of work created from a Plugin description. |
| **Plugin** | Editing | A Python dictionary or class defining the type and behavior of a Node. |
| **DispatchGraph** | Editing | An editable Python object describing how to split a Workflow execution Graph into discrete tasks. |
| **Flow** | Execution | A non-editable TaskFlow object generated from a Graph containing all Atom execution objects. |
| **Backend** | Execution | A persistent, disk-based component storing task states, inputs, and outputs to enable distributed execution. |

## Workflow File Operations

### Listing Discovered Node Types (Plugins)

To query the registry for all node definitions currently active and available for graph construction:

```python
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_plugins, PluginRegistry

> register_plugins()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_all_plugins, PluginRegistry

register_all_plugins()
```

my_workflow.export_to_file("/path/to/workflow.json")

```

## Execution Modes & Farm Dispatching

AYON Workflow supports three distinct execution frameworks:

| Mode | Description | Persistence | Distribution |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **In-Memory** | Runs entirely in memory within a single Python process. Best for rapid local development or host-DCC automation. | None | Single process |
| **Backend** | Persists state to a disk-based system. Enables individual flows to be split, resumed, or retried on failure. | **Disk** (Persistent backend directory data) | Single or Multi-process |
| **Farm Distributed** | Automatically splits sub-flows, matching node connections to job dependencies inside a render farm. | **Disk + Farm** (Persistent backend directory data + Render jobs/tasks in farm manager) | Multi-machine |

### Python API Execution Call Reference

```python
from ayon_workflow.workflow_execution import (
    execute_workflow,
    execute_in_memory,
    execute_from_backend,
    submit_workflow_to_farm,
)

# All execution functions works via workflow object or path

# Standard memory execution
execute_workflow(my_workflow)
execute_workflow("/path/to/workflow.json")

> execute_in_memory("/path/to/workflow.json")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Local execution: the whole workflow is run all at once locally with the task status being held in memory
execute_workflow(my_workflow)  # from a Workflow object
execute_workflow("/path/to/workflow.json")  # from a Workfile file

# optional 
execute_workflow(
    my_workflow,
    inputs_data: Union[Dict, str, None] = {"NoOp1.input_data": "custom_value"},  # override input on the flight
    log: Optional[Logger] = log,  # custom logger
    flow_notifier: Optional[Callable] = my_flow_tracking_func,  # this function get notified on flow updates
    task_notifier: Optional[Callable] = my_task_tracking_func,  # this function get notified on task updates
)
```

# Persistent backend execution for individual slices/sub-graphs
execute_from_backend(
    "/path/to/workflow.json",
    "/path/to/shared/farm/backend",
    slice_flow_id,
    full_flow_id,
    project_name
)

# Render farm job submission and orchestration 
submit_workflow_to_farm(
    "/path/to/workflow.json",
    "/path/to/shared/farm/backend",  # Must exist and be network reachable
    project_name="my_project_name"   # Required parameter for multi-platform root resolution

> )

Reviewer: This is not it.
Feel free to directly steal from: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-workflow/blob/develop/docs/execution-modes.md

./ayon_console.exe addon workflow execute --workflow-path /path/to/workflow.json

# In-memory execution with dynamic input injection file
./ayon_console.exe addon workflow execute --workflow-path /path/to/workflow.json --inputs-path /path/to/input.json

# Individual slice flow processing on a farm worker node
./ayon_console.exe addon workflow execute-slice-flow --backend-dir /shared/farm/backend --slice-flow-id <flow_uuid> --full-flow_id <full_flow_id>

# Render farm submission
./ayon_console.exe addon workflow submit --workflow-path /path/to/workflow.json --backend-dir /path/to/shared/farm/backend
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="linux&mac" label=<div><span style={{color:'#1c2026',backgroundColor:'#f47421', borderRadius: '4px', padding: '2px 4px'}}>Linux</span> & <span style={{color:'#1c2026',backgroundColor:'#e9eff5', borderRadius: '4px', padding: '2px 4px'}}>MacOS</span></div> >

```bash
cd <ayon-launcher-installation-location>

# In-memory execution
ayon addon workflow execute --workflow-path /path/to/workflow.json

# In-memory execution with dynamic input injection file
ayon addon workflow execute --workflow-path /path/to/workflow.json --inputs-path /path/to/input.json

> # Individual slice flow processing on a farm worker node

Reviewer: I'd suggest we put those after the submit one. (you submit first, then you execute per slice).

```text
ayon_your_addon/
├── plugins/
│   └── workflow/
│       ├── __init__.py          # Must expose a get_plugins() function
│       descendants workflow plugins

```

### Custom Workflow Node Blueprint

Every custom workflow node class must inherit from `WorkflowTaskNode`. Type hints for inputs and outputs, as well as default fallback values for inputs, are dynamically extracted directly from the signature of the `execute()` method.

You can leverage standard data types located inside `ayon_workflow.datatypes` for type hints for arguments in the `execute()` method:

* `ContextItem` / `ProjectItem` / `FolderItem` / `TaskItem`
* `FrameRange` / `ImageSequence` / `Video`

### Custom Node Example Implementations

#### Example 1: Resolve Asset URI Node

This node contacts the server database via the native `ayon_api` to map global asset URIs to explicit file paths.

```python title="my_workflows/resolve_uri.py"
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import (
    InputAttribute,
    OutputAttribute,
    WorkflowTaskNode,
)

> class ResolveAssetURI(WorkflowTaskNode):

Reviewer: This is great !

    """Resolve an AYON Asset URI into an absolute file path."""
    
    version = "1.0.0"

    inputs = [
        InputAttribute(name="ayon_asset_uri", description="AYON Asset URI"),
        InputAttribute(name="resolve_roots", description="Resolve Roots flag"),
    ]

    outputs = [
        OutputAttribute(name="resolved_path", description="Resolved Absolute Path"),
    ]

    def execute(self, ayon_asset_uri: str, resolve_roots: bool = False) -> str:
        import ayon_api
        
        response = ayon_api.post(
            "resolve",
            resolveRoots=resolve_roots,
            uris=[ayon_asset_uri]
        )
        
        if response.status_code != 200:
            raise RuntimeError(f"Unable to resolve URI '{ayon_asset_uri}': {response.text}")

        data = response.data[0]
        if data.get("error"):
            raise RuntimeError(data["error"])

        return data["entities"][0]["filePath"]

def get_plugins() -> list[type[WorkflowTaskNode]]:
    return [ResolveAssetURI]

```

> ##### Testing the Resolve Node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Testing the ResolveAssetURI Node
```

Open the AYON Console via the tray interface and run the following interactive block to test input ingestion and path parsing logic:

```python
from ayon_workflow.workflow_editor import Workflow
from ayon_workflow.workflow_execution import execute_workflow
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_plugins

# Re-register tools to discover the new plugin architecture

> register_plugins()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_all_plugins

# Re-register tools to discover the new plugin architecture
register_all_plugins()
```

```python title="my_workflows/concatentate_and_float.py"
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import (
    WorkflowTaskNode,
    InputAttribute,
    OutputAttribute,
)

class ConcatenateAndFloat(WorkflowTaskNode):
    """Combine text strings and track a floating-point computation constant."""
    
    version = "1.0.0"

    inputs = [
        InputAttribute(name="text1", description="First string"),
        InputAttribute(name="text2", description="Second string"),
        InputAttribute(name="separator", description="Text delimiter character", default=" "),
    ]

    outputs = [
        OutputAttribute(name="concatenated_text", description="Resulting combined text string"),
        OutputAttribute(name="float_value", description="Computed metadata float metric"),
    ]

    def execute(self, text1: str, text2: str, separator: str = " ") -> tuple[str, float]:
        # Tuple return ordering must match the index orientation of the outputs specification
        combined_text = f"{text1}{separator}{text2}"
        return combined_text, 1.0

def get_plugins() -> list[type[WorkflowTaskNode]]:
    return [ConcatenateAndFloat]

```

## Further Info
For further info, you can refer to 

> - [AYON Workflow Addon API Reference](https://docs.ayon.dev/ayon-workflow/latest/) 

Author: This link doesn't exist yet. it'll be once the [mkdocs PR](https://github.com/ynput/ayon-workflow/pull/106) on ayon-workflow repo is merged.

---
id: dev_addon_workflow
title: AYON Workflow Addon Developer Documentation
sidebar_label: Workflow
description: AYON Workflow Addon Developer Documentation
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

## Overview
This developer reference guide covers how to programmatically create, edit, execute, and extend custom workflows using the `ayon-workflow` Python API and Command-Line Interface (CLI).

## Quick Start: My First Workflow

> Before deep-diving into execution frameworks, here is how to programmatically create an execution graph, define an entry parameter, and compute an in-memory results dictionary inside the AYON console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before deep-diving into execution frameworks, here is how to programmatically create an execution graph, define an entry parameter, and run the whole workflow in-memory inside the AYON console:
```

```python
from ayon_workflow.workflow_editor import Workflow
from ayon_workflow.workflow_execution import execute_workflow
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_all_plugins

# Discover all available node definitions in the environment
register_all_plugins()

# Create a new workflow

> my_workflow = Workflow(name="My First Workflow")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
my_workflow = Workflow(name="My First Workflow", description="An optional description here")
```

graph = my_workflow.execution_graph

# Create a node using the NoOp (No Operation) plugin type
node = graph.create_node("NoOp")
node["input_data"] = "hello world"

# Execute locally in the active session
result = execute_workflow(my_workflow)
print(result)  # Output: {'NoOp1.output_data': 'hello world'}

```

## Glossary & Core Architecture

| Term | Domain | Definition |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Workflow** | Editing | An editable Python object describing an execution Graph and multiple optional DispatchGraphs. |

> | **Graph** | Editing | An editable Python object describing a workflow execution composed of multiple Node objects. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Graph** | Editing | An editable Python object describing a workflow to be executed, composed of multiple Node objects. |
```

| **Node** | Editing | A Python object representing a unit of work created from a Plugin description. |

> | **Plugin** | Editing | A Python dictionary or class defining the type and behavior of a Node. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Plugin** | Editing | A "type" of Node available in the Graph, implemented as Python class or dictionary. |
```

> | **DispatchGraph** | Editing | An editable Python object describing how to split a Workflow execution Graph into discrete tasks. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **DispatchGraph** | Editing | An editable Python object describing how to split a Workflow execution Graph into discrete tasks/jobs. |
```

| **Flow** | Execution | A non-editable TaskFlow object generated from a Graph containing all Atom execution objects. |
| **Backend** | Execution | A persistent, disk-based component storing task states, inputs, and outputs to enable distributed execution. |

## Workflow File Operations

### Listing Discovered Node Types (Plugins)

To query the registry for all node definitions currently active and available for graph construction:

```python
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import register_all_plugins, PluginRegistry

register_all_plugins()

for plugin in PluginRegistry().plugin_list():
    print(f"   + {plugin}")

```

### JSON Import/Export Serialization

> Workflows can be saved down to or loaded from `.json` workflow layout:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workflows can be saved down to or loaded from `.json` files:
```

| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **In-Memory** | Runs entirely in memory within a single Python process. Best for rapid local development or host-DCC automation. | None | Single process |
| **Backend** | Persists state to a disk-based system. Enables individual flows to be split, resumed, or retried on failure. | **Disk** (Persistent backend directory data) | Single or Multi-process |
| **Farm Distributed** | Automatically splits sub-flows, matching node connections to job dependencies inside a render farm. | **Disk + Farm** (Persistent backend directory data + Render jobs/tasks in farm manager) | Multi-machine |

### Python API Execution Call Reference

```python
from ayon_workflow.workflow_execution.from_backend.job_description import to_job_description
from ayon_workflow.workflow_execution import (
    execute_workflow,
    execute_in_memory,
    execute_from_backend,
    submit_workflow_to_farm,
)

# Local execution: the whole workflow is run all at once locally with the task status being held in memory
execute_workflow(my_workflow)  # from a Workflow object
execute_workflow("/path/to/workflow.json")  # from a Workfile file

# optional 
execute_workflow(
    my_workflow,

>     inputs_data: Union[Dict, str, None] = {"NoOp1.input_data": "custom_value"},  # override input on the flight

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    inputs_data: Union[Dict, str, None] = {"NoOp1.input_data": "custom_value"},  # override input on the fly
```

    log: Optional[Logger] = log,  # custom logger
    flow_notifier: Optional[Callable] = my_flow_tracking_func,  # this function get notified on flow updates
    task_notifier: Optional[Callable] = my_task_tracking_func,  # this function get notified on task updates
)

# Render farm job submission 
submit_workflow_to_farm(
    "/path/to/workflow.json",
    "/path/to/shared/farm/backend",  # Must exist and be network reachable
    project_name="my_project_name"   # Required parameter for multi-platform root resolution
)

# Persistent backend execution for individual slices/sub-graphs
job_description = to_job_description(
    my_workflow,
    backend_dir="/path/to/shared/farm/backend"
)
for step in job_description.steps:
    args = step.script.args
    result = addon.execute_from_backend(
        # Get command line to run.
        args[5],  # execution graph path,
        args[7],  # backend directory
        args[9],  # slice flow id
        args[11], # full flow id

>     )

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure this is worth to document. It might cause more confusion.
It works and it's 100% valid, but this'd be used when you want to run a multi-process/machine process without a farm. Not sure a lot of our client will be interested in that.

Maybe keeping only the local and farm examples is actually enough ?

Author: @rdelillo I don't have a strong opinion in this matter tbh. 
I understand that I can use this after submitting the graph to farm and after the backend files created. 
and it looks cool that I can go and play with these files manually maybe for debugging.

Tagging @BigRoy for visibility.

Reviewer 2: It's making things look more complex - so I'd rather remove it OR put it much much further down on the page.

First we want to show how trivial the API is to use. (show higher level how to build a graph and make custom nodes, and execute it)

The node class definition can be its own section so that we have "Graph manipulation", "Custom nodes", "Advanced API usage". And make it distinct parts so it feels like you're getting up to speed quickly on how to access the graph, etc.

I think we're pretty close - we just may want to take some of the 'advanced' API examples into a separate section below custom nodes, etc.

Author: I've removed it.

```text
ayon_your_addon/
├── plugins/
│   └── workflow/
│       ├── __init__.py          # Must expose a get_plugins() function
│       descendants workflow plugins

```

### Custom Workflow Node Blueprint

Every custom workflow node class must inherit from `WorkflowTaskNode`. Type hints for inputs and outputs, as well as default fallback values for inputs, are dynamically extracted directly from the signature of the `execute()` method.

You can leverage standard data types located inside `ayon_workflow.datatypes` for type hints for arguments in the `execute()` method:

* `ContextItem` / `ProjectItem` / `FolderItem` / `TaskItem`
* `FrameRange` / `ImageSequence` / `Video`

### Custom Node Example Implementations

#### Example 1: Resolve Asset URI Node

This node contacts the server database via the native `ayon_api` to map global asset URIs to explicit file paths.

```python title="my_workflows/resolve_uri.py"
from ayon_workflow.plugin_system import (
    InputAttribute,
    OutputAttribute,
    WorkflowTaskNode,
)

class ResolveAssetURI(WorkflowTaskNode):
    """Resolve an AYON Asset URI into an absolute file path."""
    

>     version = "1.0.0"

Reviewer: is it worth flagging that the version there is needed to track plugins iteration over time ?

Reviewer 2: Might be relevant to explain, yes.

Author: How does it work? I only know about the format but I've no idea what happens if we have different versions of the same node.

Reviewer 2: I'd like these docs to be live as soon as possible. Not sure if that means it needs to be merged, if so... let's merge and resolve this in a separate PR. It's an enhancement, not a critical issue to get the docs out.

Reviewer: (currently the version checking does nothing)
